README.rst, before:

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/main/notebooks/_static/pygeoutils_logo.png
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver

|

.. image:: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/b0df2f6192f0a18b9e622a3edff52e77/status.svg
    :target: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/b0df2f6192f0a18b9e622a3edff52e77
    :alt: JOSS

|

.. |pygeohydro| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeohydro/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeohydro/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pygeoogc| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoogc/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoogc/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pygeoutils| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoutils/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoutils/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pynhd| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pynhd/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pynhd/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |py3dep| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/py3dep/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/py3dep/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pydaymet| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pydaymet/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pydaymet/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pygridmet| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pynldas2| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pynldas2/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pynldas2/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |async| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/async-retriever/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/async-retriever/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |signatures| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/hydrosignatures/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/hydrosignatures/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

================ ==================================================================== ============
Package          Description                                                          Status
================ ==================================================================== ============
PyNHD_           Navigate and subset NHDPlus (MR and HR) using web services           |pynhd|
Py3DEP_          Access topographic data through National Map's 3DEP web service      |py3dep|
PyGeoHydro_      Access NWIS, NID, WQP, eHydro, NLCD, CAMELS, and SSEBop databases    |pygeohydro|
PyDaymet_        Access daily, monthly, and annual climate data via Daymet            |pydaymet|
PyGridMET_       Access daily climate data via GridMET                                |pygridmet|
PyNLDAS2_        Access hourly NLDAS-2 data via web services                          |pynldas2|
HydroSignatures_ A collection of tools for computing hydrological signatures          |signatures|
AsyncRetriever_  High-level API for asynchronous requests with persistent caching     |async|
PyGeoOGC_        Send queries to any ArcGIS RESTful-, WMS-, and WFS-based services    |pygeoogc|
PyGeoUtils_      Utilities for manipulating geospatial, (Geo)JSON, and (Geo)TIFF data |pygeoutils|
================ ==================================================================== ============

.. _PyGeoHydro: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeohydro
.. _AsyncRetriever: https://github.com/hyriver/async-retriever
.. _PyGeoOGC: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoogc
.. _PyGeoUtils: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoutils
.. _PyNHD: https://github.com/hyriver/pynhd
.. _Py3DEP: https://github.com/hyriver/py3dep
.. _PyDaymet: https://github.com/hyriver/pydaymet
.. _PyGridMET: https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet
.. _PyNLDAS2: https://github.com/hyriver/pynldas2
.. _HydroSignatures: https://github.com/hyriver/hydrosignatures

PyGridMET: Daily climate data through GridMET
---------------------------------------------

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pygridmet.svg
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pygridmet
    :alt: PyPi

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/conda-forge/pygridmet.svg
    :target: https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/pygridmet
    :alt: Conda Version

.. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/hyriver/pygridmet/branch/main/graph/badge.svg
    :target: https://codecov.io/gh/hyriver/pygridmet
    :alt: CodeCov

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pygridmet.svg
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pygridmet
    :alt: Python Versions

.. image:: https://static.pepy.tech/badge/pygridmet
    :target: https://pepy.tech/project/pygridmet
    :alt: Downloads

|

.. image:: https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/hyriver/pygridmet/badge
   :target: https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/hyriver/pygridmet
   :alt: CodeFactor

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg
    :target: https://github.com/psf/black
    :alt: black

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/pre--commit-enabled-brightgreen?logo=pre-commit&logoColor=white
    :target: https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit
    :alt: pre-commit

.. image:: https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg
    :target: https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/main?urlpath=lab/tree/notebooks
    :alt: Binder

|

Features
--------

PyGridMET is a part of `HyRiver <https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver>`__ software stack that
is designed to aid in hydroclimate analysis through web services. This package provides
access to daily climate data over contermonious US (CONUS) from
`GridMET <https://www.climatologylab.org/gridmet.html>`__ database using NetCDF
Subset Service (NCSS). Both single pixel (using ``get_bycoords`` function) and gridded data (using
``get_bygeom``) are supported which are returned as
``pandas.DataFrame`` and ``xarray.Dataset``, respectively.

You can find some example notebooks `here <https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples>`__.

Moreover, under the hood, PyGridMET uses
`PyGeoOGC <https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoogc>`__ and
`AsyncRetriever <https://github.com/hyriver/async-retriever>`__ packages
for making requests in parallel and storing responses in chunks. This improves the
reliability and speed of data retrieval significantly.

You can also try using PyGridMET without installing
it on your system by clicking on the binder badge. A Jupyter Lab
instance with the HyRiver stack pre-installed will be launched in your web browser, and you
can start coding!

Moreover, requests for additional functionalities can be submitted via
`issue tracker <https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet/issues>`__.

Citation
--------
If you use any of HyRiver packages in your research, we appreciate citations:

.. code-block:: bibtex

    @article{Chegini_2021,
        author = {Chegini, Taher and Li, Hong-Yi and Leung, L. Ruby},
        doi = {10.21105/joss.03175},
        journal = {Journal of Open Source Software},
        month = {10},
        number = {66},
        pages = {1--3},
        title = {{HyRiver: Hydroclimate Data Retriever}},
        volume = {6},
        year = {2021}
    }

Installation
------------

You can install PyGridMET using ``pip`` as follows:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install pygridmet

Alternatively, PyGridMET can be installed from the ``conda-forge`` repository
using `Conda <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/>`__:

.. code-block:: console

    $ conda install -c conda-forge pygridmet

Quick start
-----------

You can use PyGridMET using command-line or as a Python library. The commanda-line
provides access to two functionality:

- Getting gridded climate data: You must create a ``geopandas.GeoDataFrame`` that contains
  the geometries of the target locations. This dataframe must have four columns:
  ``id``, ``start``, ``end``, ``geometry``. The ``id`` column is used as
  filenames for saving the obtained climate data to a NetCDF (``.nc``) file. The ``start``
  and ``end`` columns are starting and ending dates of the target period. Then,
  you must save the dataframe as a shapefile (``.shp``) or geopackage (``.gpkg``) with
  CRS attribute.
- Getting single pixel climate data: You must create a CSV file that
  contains coordinates of the target locations. This file must have at four columns:
  ``id``, ``start``, ``end``, ``lon``, and ``lat``. The ``id`` column is used as filenames
  for saving the obtained climate data to a CSV (``.csv``) file. The ``start`` and ``end``
  columns are the same as the ``geometry`` command. The ``lon`` and ``lat`` columns are
  the longitude and latitude coordinates of the target locations.

.. code-block:: console

    $ pygridmet -h
    Usage: pygridmet [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

    Command-line interface for PyGridMET.

    Options:
    -h, --help  Show this message and exit.

    Commands:
    coords    Retrieve climate data for a list of coordinates.
    geometry  Retrieve climate data for a dataframe of geometries.

The ``coords`` sub-command is as follows:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pygridmet coords -h
    Usage: pygridmet coords [OPTIONS] FPATH

    Retrieve climate data for a list of coordinates.

    FPATH: Path to a csv file with four columns:
        - ``id``: Feature identifiers that gridmet uses as the output netcdf filenames.
        - ``start``: Start time.
        - ``end``: End time.
        - ``lon``: Longitude of the points of interest.
        - ``lat``: Latitude of the points of interest.
        - ``snow``: (optional) Separate snowfall from precipitation, default is ``False``.

    Examples:
        $ cat coords.csv
        id,lon,lat,start,end
        california,-122.2493328,37.8122894,2012-01-01,2014-12-31
        $ pygridmet coords coords.csv -v pr -v tmmn

    Options:
    -v, --variables TEXT  Target variables. You can pass this flag multiple
                            times for multiple variables.
    -s, --save_dir PATH   Path to a directory to save the requested files.
                            Extension for the outputs is .nc for geometry and .csv
                            for coords.
    --disable_ssl         Pass to disable SSL certification verification.
    -h, --help            Show this message and exit.

And, the ``geometry`` sub-command is as follows:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pygridmet geometry -h
    Usage: pygridmet geometry [OPTIONS] FPATH

    Retrieve climate data for a dataframe of geometries.

    FPATH: Path to a shapefile (.shp) or geopackage (.gpkg) file.
    This file must have four columns and contain a ``crs`` attribute:
        - ``id``: Feature identifiers that gridmet uses as the output netcdf filenames.
        - ``start``: Start time.
        - ``end``: End time.
        - ``geometry``: Target geometries.
        - ``snow``: (optional) Separate snowfall from precipitation, default is ``False``.

    Examples:
        $ pygridmet geometry geo.gpkg -v pr -v tmmn

    Options:
    -v, --variables TEXT  Target variables. You can pass this flag multiple
                            times for multiple variables.
    -s, --save_dir PATH   Path to a directory to save the requested files.
                            Extension for the outputs is .nc for geometry and .csv
                            for coords.
    --disable_ssl         Pass to disable SSL certification verification.
    -h, --help            Show this message and exit.

Now, let's see how we can use PyGridMET as a library.

PyGridMET offers two functions for getting climate data; ``get_bycoords`` and ``get_bygeom``.
The arguments of these functions are identical except the first argument where the latter
should be polygon and the former should be a coordinate (a tuple of length two as in (x, y)).
The input geometry or coordinate can be in any valid CRS (defaults to ``EPSG:4326``). The
``dates`` argument can be either a tuple of length two like ``(start_str, end_str)`` or a list of
years like ``[2000, 2005]``. It is noted that both functions have a ``snow`` flag for separating
snow from precipitation using
`Martinez and Gupta (2010) <https://doi.org/10.1029/2009WR008294>`__ method.

We can get a dataframe of available variables and their info by calling
``GridMET().gridmet_table``:

+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Variable                               | Abbr       | Unit                         |
+========================================+============+==============================+
| Precipitation                          | ``pr``     | mm                           |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Maximum Relative Humidity              | ``rmax``   | %                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Minimum Relative Humidity              | ``rmin``   | %                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Specific Humidity                      | ``sph``    | kg/kg                        |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Surface Radiation                      | ``srad``   | W/m2                         |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Wind Direction                         | ``th``     | Degrees Clockwise from north |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Minimum Air Temperature                | ``tmmn``   | K                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Maximum Air Temperature                | ``tmmx``   | K                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Wind Speed                             | ``vs``     | m/s                          |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Burning Index                          | ``bi``     | Dimensionless                |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Fuel Moisture (100-hr)                 | ``fm100``  | %                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Fuel Moisture (1000-hr)                | ``fm1000`` | %                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Energy Release Component               | ``erc``    | Dimensionless                |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Reference Evapotranspiration (Alfalfa) | ``etr``    | mm                           |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Reference Evapotranspiration (Grass)   | ``pet``    | mm                           |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Vapor Pressure Deficit                 | ``vpd``    | kPa                          |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+

.. code-block:: python

    from pynhd import NLDI
    import pygridmet as gridmet

    geometry = NLDI().get_basins("01031500").geometry[0]

    var = ["pr", "tmmn"]
    dates = ("2000-01-01", "2000-06-30")

    daily = gridmet.get_bygeom(geometry, dates, variables=var, snow=True)

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/main/notebooks/_static/gridmet_grid.png
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/blob/main/notebooks/gridmet.ipynb

If the input geometry (or coordinate) is in a CRS other than ``EPSG:4326``, we should pass
it to the functions.

.. code-block:: python

    coords = (-1431147.7928, 318483.4618)
    crs = 3542
    dates = ("2000-01-01", "2006-12-31")
    data = gridmet.get_bycoords(coords, dates, variables=var, loc_crs=crs)

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/main/notebooks/_static/gridmet_loc.png
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/blob/main/notebooks/gridmet.ipynb

Additionally, the ``get_bycoords`` function accepts a list of coordinates and by setting the
``to_xarray`` flag to ``True`` it can return the results as a ``xarray.Dataset`` instead of
a ``pandas.DataFrame``:

.. code-block:: python

    coords = [(-94.986, 29.973), (-95.478, 30.134)]
    idx = ["P1", "P2"]
    clm_ds = gridmet.get_bycoords(coords, range(2000, 2021), coords_id=idx, to_xarray=True)

Contributing
------------

Contributions are very welcomed. Please read
`CONTRIBUTING.rst <https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.rst>`__
file for instructions.

Commit message:

DOC: Add info about the new cert env var. [skip ci]

README.rst, after:

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/main/notebooks/_static/pygeoutils_logo.png
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver

|

.. image:: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/b0df2f6192f0a18b9e622a3edff52e77/status.svg
    :target: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/b0df2f6192f0a18b9e622a3edff52e77
    :alt: JOSS

|

.. |pygeohydro| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeohydro/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeohydro/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pygeoogc| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoogc/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoogc/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pygeoutils| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoutils/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoutils/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pynhd| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pynhd/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pynhd/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |py3dep| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/py3dep/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/py3dep/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pydaymet| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pydaymet/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pydaymet/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pygridmet| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |pynldas2| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/pynldas2/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/pynldas2/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |async| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/async-retriever/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/async-retriever/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

.. |signatures| image:: https://github.com/hyriver/hydrosignatures/actions/workflows/test.yml/badge.svg
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/hydrosignatures/actions/workflows/test.yml
    :alt: Github Actions

================ ==================================================================== ============
Package          Description                                                          Status
================ ==================================================================== ============
PyNHD_           Navigate and subset NHDPlus (MR and HR) using web services           |pynhd|
Py3DEP_          Access topographic data through National Map's 3DEP web service      |py3dep|
PyGeoHydro_      Access NWIS, NID, WQP, eHydro, NLCD, CAMELS, and SSEBop databases    |pygeohydro|
PyDaymet_        Access daily, monthly, and annual climate data via Daymet            |pydaymet|
PyGridMET_       Access daily climate data via GridMET                                |pygridmet|
PyNLDAS2_        Access hourly NLDAS-2 data via web services                          |pynldas2|
HydroSignatures_ A collection of tools for computing hydrological signatures          |signatures|
AsyncRetriever_  High-level API for asynchronous requests with persistent caching     |async|
PyGeoOGC_        Send queries to any ArcGIS RESTful-, WMS-, and WFS-based services    |pygeoogc|
PyGeoUtils_      Utilities for manipulating geospatial, (Geo)JSON, and (Geo)TIFF data |pygeoutils|
================ ==================================================================== ============

.. _PyGeoHydro: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeohydro
.. _AsyncRetriever: https://github.com/hyriver/async-retriever
.. _PyGeoOGC: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoogc
.. _PyGeoUtils: https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoutils
.. _PyNHD: https://github.com/hyriver/pynhd
.. _Py3DEP: https://github.com/hyriver/py3dep
.. _PyDaymet: https://github.com/hyriver/pydaymet
.. _PyGridMET: https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet
.. _PyNLDAS2: https://github.com/hyriver/pynldas2
.. _HydroSignatures: https://github.com/hyriver/hydrosignatures

PyGridMET: Daily climate data through GridMET
---------------------------------------------

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/pygridmet.svg
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pygridmet
    :alt: PyPi

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/conda-forge/pygridmet.svg
    :target: https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/pygridmet
    :alt: Conda Version

.. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/hyriver/pygridmet/branch/main/graph/badge.svg
    :target: https://codecov.io/gh/hyriver/pygridmet
    :alt: CodeCov

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/pygridmet.svg
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pygridmet
    :alt: Python Versions

.. image:: https://static.pepy.tech/badge/pygridmet
    :target: https://pepy.tech/project/pygridmet
    :alt: Downloads

|

.. image:: https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/hyriver/pygridmet/badge
   :target: https://www.codefactor.io/repository/github/hyriver/pygridmet
   :alt: CodeFactor

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg
    :target: https://github.com/psf/black
    :alt: black

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/badge/pre--commit-enabled-brightgreen?logo=pre-commit&logoColor=white
    :target: https://github.com/pre-commit/pre-commit
    :alt: pre-commit

.. image:: https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg
    :target: https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/main?urlpath=lab/tree/notebooks
    :alt: Binder

|

Features
--------

PyGridMET is a part of `HyRiver <https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver>`__ software stack that
is designed to aid in hydroclimate analysis through web services. This package provides
access to daily climate data over contermonious US (CONUS) from
`GridMET <https://www.climatologylab.org/gridmet.html>`__ database using NetCDF
Subset Service (NCSS). Both single pixel (using ``get_bycoords`` function) and gridded data (using
``get_bygeom``) are supported which are returned as
``pandas.DataFrame`` and ``xarray.Dataset``, respectively.

You can find some example notebooks `here <https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples>`__.

Moreover, under the hood, PyGridMET uses
`PyGeoOGC <https://github.com/hyriver/pygeoogc>`__ and
`AsyncRetriever <https://github.com/hyriver/async-retriever>`__ packages
for making requests in parallel and storing responses in chunks. This improves the
reliability and speed of data retrieval significantly.

You can control the request/response caching behavior and verbosity of the package
by setting the following environment variables:

* ``HYRIVER_CACHE_NAME``: Path to the caching SQLite database for asynchronous HTTP
  requests. It defaults to ``./cache/aiohttp_cache.sqlite``
* ``HYRIVER_CACHE_NAME_HTTP``: Path to the caching SQLite database for HTTP requests.
  It defaults to ``./cache/http_cache.sqlite``
* ``HYRIVER_CACHE_EXPIRE``: Expiration time for cached requests in seconds. It defaults to
  one week.
* ``HYRIVER_CACHE_DISABLE``: Disable reading/writing from/to the cache. The default is false.
* ``HYRIVER_SSL_CERT``: Path to a SSL certificate file.

For example, in your code before making any requests you can do:

.. code-block:: python

    import os

    os.environ["HYRIVER_CACHE_NAME"] = "path/to/aiohttp_cache.sqlite"
    os.environ["HYRIVER_CACHE_NAME_HTTP"] = "path/to/http_cache.sqlite"
    os.environ["HYRIVER_CACHE_EXPIRE"] = "3600"
    os.environ["HYRIVER_CACHE_DISABLE"] = "true"
    os.environ["HYRIVER_SSL_CERT"] = "path/to/cert.pem"

You can also try using PyGridMET without installing
it on your system by clicking on the binder badge. A Jupyter Lab
instance with the HyRiver stack pre-installed will be launched in your web browser, and you
can start coding!

Moreover, requests for additional functionalities can be submitted via
`issue tracker <https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet/issues>`__.

Citation
--------
If you use any of HyRiver packages in your research, we appreciate citations:

.. code-block:: bibtex

    @article{Chegini_2021,
        author = {Chegini, Taher and Li, Hong-Yi and Leung, L. Ruby},
        doi = {10.21105/joss.03175},
        journal = {Journal of Open Source Software},
        month = {10},
        number = {66},
        pages = {1--3},
        title = {{HyRiver: Hydroclimate Data Retriever}},
        volume = {6},
        year = {2021}
    }

Installation
------------

You can install PyGridMET using ``pip`` as follows:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install pygridmet

Alternatively, PyGridMET can be installed from the ``conda-forge`` repository
using `Conda <https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/>`__:

.. code-block:: console

    $ conda install -c conda-forge pygridmet

Quick start
-----------

You can use PyGridMET using command-line or as a Python library. The commanda-line
provides access to two functionality:

- Getting gridded climate data: You must create a ``geopandas.GeoDataFrame`` that contains
  the geometries of the target locations. This dataframe must have four columns:
  ``id``, ``start``, ``end``, ``geometry``. The ``id`` column is used as
  filenames for saving the obtained climate data to a NetCDF (``.nc``) file. The ``start``
  and ``end`` columns are starting and ending dates of the target period. Then,
  you must save the dataframe as a shapefile (``.shp``) or geopackage (``.gpkg``) with
  CRS attribute.
- Getting single pixel climate data: You must create a CSV file that
  contains coordinates of the target locations. This file must have at four columns:
  ``id``, ``start``, ``end``, ``lon``, and ``lat``. The ``id`` column is used as filenames
  for saving the obtained climate data to a CSV (``.csv``) file. The ``start`` and ``end``
  columns are the same as the ``geometry`` command. The ``lon`` and ``lat`` columns are
  the longitude and latitude coordinates of the target locations.

.. code-block:: console

    $ pygridmet -h
    Usage: pygridmet [OPTIONS] COMMAND [ARGS]...

    Command-line interface for PyGridMET.

    Options:
    -h, --help  Show this message and exit.

    Commands:
    coords    Retrieve climate data for a list of coordinates.
    geometry  Retrieve climate data for a dataframe of geometries.

The ``coords`` sub-command is as follows:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pygridmet coords -h
    Usage: pygridmet coords [OPTIONS] FPATH

    Retrieve climate data for a list of coordinates.

    FPATH: Path to a csv file with four columns:
        - ``id``: Feature identifiers that gridmet uses as the output netcdf filenames.
        - ``start``: Start time.
        - ``end``: End time.
        - ``lon``: Longitude of the points of interest.
        - ``lat``: Latitude of the points of interest.
        - ``snow``: (optional) Separate snowfall from precipitation, default is ``False``.

    Examples:
        $ cat coords.csv
        id,lon,lat,start,end
        california,-122.2493328,37.8122894,2012-01-01,2014-12-31
        $ pygridmet coords coords.csv -v pr -v tmmn

    Options:
    -v, --variables TEXT  Target variables. You can pass this flag multiple
                            times for multiple variables.
    -s, --save_dir PATH   Path to a directory to save the requested files.
                            Extension for the outputs is .nc for geometry and .csv
                            for coords.
    --disable_ssl         Pass to disable SSL certification verification.
    -h, --help            Show this message and exit.

And, the ``geometry`` sub-command is as follows:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pygridmet geometry -h
    Usage: pygridmet geometry [OPTIONS] FPATH

    Retrieve climate data for a dataframe of geometries.

    FPATH: Path to a shapefile (.shp) or geopackage (.gpkg) file.
    This file must have four columns and contain a ``crs`` attribute:
        - ``id``: Feature identifiers that gridmet uses as the output netcdf filenames.
        - ``start``: Start time.
        - ``end``: End time.
        - ``geometry``: Target geometries.
        - ``snow``: (optional) Separate snowfall from precipitation, default is ``False``.

    Examples:
        $ pygridmet geometry geo.gpkg -v pr -v tmmn

    Options:
    -v, --variables TEXT  Target variables. You can pass this flag multiple
                            times for multiple variables.
    -s, --save_dir PATH   Path to a directory to save the requested files.
                            Extension for the outputs is .nc for geometry and .csv
                            for coords.
    --disable_ssl         Pass to disable SSL certification verification.
    -h, --help            Show this message and exit.

Now, let's see how we can use PyGridMET as a library.

PyGridMET offers two functions for getting climate data; ``get_bycoords`` and ``get_bygeom``.
The arguments of these functions are identical except the first argument where the latter
should be polygon and the former should be a coordinate (a tuple of length two as in (x, y)).
The input geometry or coordinate can be in any valid CRS (defaults to ``EPSG:4326``). The
``dates`` argument can be either a tuple of length two like ``(start_str, end_str)`` or a list of
years like ``[2000, 2005]``. It is noted that both functions have a ``snow`` flag for separating
snow from precipitation using
`Martinez and Gupta (2010) <https://doi.org/10.1029/2009WR008294>`__ method.

We can get a dataframe of available variables and their info by calling
``GridMET().gridmet_table``:

+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Variable                               | Abbr       | Unit                         |
+========================================+============+==============================+
| Precipitation                          | ``pr``     | mm                           |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Maximum Relative Humidity              | ``rmax``   | %                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Minimum Relative Humidity              | ``rmin``   | %                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Specific Humidity                      | ``sph``    | kg/kg                        |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Surface Radiation                      | ``srad``   | W/m2                         |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Wind Direction                         | ``th``     | Degrees Clockwise from north |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Minimum Air Temperature                | ``tmmn``   | K                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Maximum Air Temperature                | ``tmmx``   | K                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Wind Speed                             | ``vs``     | m/s                          |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Burning Index                          | ``bi``     | Dimensionless                |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Fuel Moisture (100-hr)                 | ``fm100``  | %                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Fuel Moisture (1000-hr)                | ``fm1000`` | %                            |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Energy Release Component               | ``erc``    | Dimensionless                |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Reference Evapotranspiration (Alfalfa) | ``etr``    | mm                           |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Reference Evapotranspiration (Grass)   | ``pet``    | mm                           |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+
| Vapor Pressure Deficit                 | ``vpd``    | kPa                          |
+----------------------------------------+------------+------------------------------+

.. code-block:: python

    from pynhd import NLDI
    import pygridmet as gridmet

    geometry = NLDI().get_basins("01031500").geometry[0]

    var = ["pr", "tmmn"]
    dates = ("2000-01-01", "2000-06-30")

    daily = gridmet.get_bygeom(geometry, dates, variables=var, snow=True)

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/main/notebooks/_static/gridmet_grid.png
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/blob/main/notebooks/gridmet.ipynb

If the input geometry (or coordinate) is in a CRS other than ``EPSG:4326``, we should pass
it to the functions.

.. code-block:: python

    coords = (-1431147.7928, 318483.4618)
    crs = 3542
    dates = ("2000-01-01", "2006-12-31")
    data = gridmet.get_bycoords(coords, dates, variables=var, loc_crs=crs)

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/main/notebooks/_static/gridmet_loc.png
    :target: https://github.com/hyriver/HyRiver-examples/blob/main/notebooks/gridmet.ipynb

Additionally, the ``get_bycoords`` function accepts a list of coordinates and by setting the
``to_xarray`` flag to ``True`` it can return the results as a ``xarray.Dataset`` instead of
a ``pandas.DataFrame``:

.. code-block:: python

    coords = [(-94.986, 29.973), (-95.478, 30.134)]
    idx = ["P1", "P2"]
    clm_ds = gridmet.get_bycoords(coords, range(2000, 2021), coords_id=idx, to_xarray=True)

Contributing
------------

Contributions are very welcomed. Please read
`CONTRIBUTING.rst <https://github.com/hyriver/pygridmet/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.rst>`__
file for instructions.
